enhancements: Add per-node configuration enhancement proposal (#152)
openperouter/openperouter: enhancements/per-node-configuration.md

- **Multi-rack deployments**: Different nodes are physically connected to different ToR (Top of Rack) switches but cannot be configured to peer with their respective ToRs
- **Multi-datacenter clusters**: Nodes distributed across availability zones or datacenters need to peer with location-specific BGP routers
- **Hardware heterogeneity**: Different server models have different NIC naming conventions (e.g., Dell uses `eno1`, HP uses `em1`), preventing a one-size-fits-all configuration
- **Topology flexibility**: Cannot accommodate nodes in different physical network topologies within the same cluster

### Goals

- Enable per-node BGP neighbor configuration using Kubernetes node selectors
- Support heterogeneous NIC configurations across different hardware platforms
- Allow multiple `Underlay` resources to coexist, each targeting specific node subsets
- Maintain backward compatibility with existing cluster-wide configurations
- Prevent configuration conflicts through validation

### Non-Goals

> - Per-neighbor node selectors (Option 2 - less flexible, documented as alternative)

Reviewer: It might be me and my thick head, but I am finding it very easy to mix this non-goal with the goal above of "Enable per-node BGP neighbor configuration". Could you disambiguate these somehow ? Maybe just adjust the wording.

FWIW, it seems that you're specifically listing one thing that is proposed in one alternative as a non-goal - which AFAIU automatically discards said alternative. 

Just trying to figure out the scope here.

Author: > It might be me and my thick head, but I am finding it very easy to mix this non-goal with the goal above of "Enable per-node BGP neighbor configuration". Could you disambiguate these somehow ? Maybe just adjust the wording.
> 
> FWIW, it seems that you're specifically listing one thing that is proposed in one alternative as a non-goal - which AFAIU automatically discards said alternative. 
> 
> Just trying to figure out the scope here.

I will rephrase the non goals

    Nics []string `json:"nics,omitempty"`

    EVPN *EVPNConfig `json:"evpn,omitempty"`
}
```

### Example Configurations

#### Multi-Rack Configuration

Different racks connect to different ToR switches:

```yaml
# Rack 1 nodes connect to ToR 1
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: Underlay
metadata:
  name: underlay-rack-1
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      topology.kubernetes.io/rack: rack-1
  asn: 64512
  evpn:
    vtepcidr: 100.65.1.0/24
  nics:
    - toswitch
  neighbors:
    - asn: 64500
      address: 192.168.1.254  # ToR switch for rack 1
      bfd:
        receiveInterval: 300
        transmitInterval: 300
---
# Rack 2 nodes connect to ToR 2
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: Underlay
metadata:
  name: underlay-rack-2
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      topology.kubernetes.io/rack: rack-2
  asn: 64512
  evpn:
    vtepcidr: 100.65.2.0/24
  nics:
    - toswitch
  neighbors:
    - asn: 64500
      address: 192.168.2.254  # ToR switch for rack 2
      bfd:
        receiveInterval: 300
        transmitInterval: 300
```

> #### Multi-Datacenter Configuration

Reviewer: how are these any different from the `Multi-Rack Configuration` ? I see you've dropped the bfd configurations - OK, might make sense - but, afaiu, the "big" difference is the labels used - which can be anything, as long as it matches the labels on the nodes.

Just making sure I get the API.

    matchLabels:
      topology.kubernetes.io/zone: us-west-1a
  asn: 64513
  evpn:
    vtepcidr: 100.66.0.0/24
  nics:
    - eth1
  neighbors:
    - asn: 64501
      address: 192.168.20.1  # ToR switch in DC West
```

#### Hardware-Specific NIC Configuration

Different NIC naming across vendor hardware:

```yaml
# For Dell servers with specific NIC naming
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: Underlay
metadata:
  name: underlay-dell-hardware
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      hardware.vendor: dell
  asn: 64512
  evpn:
    vtepcidr: 100.65.0.0/24
  nics:
    - eno1
    - eno2
  neighbors:
    - asn: 64500
      address: 192.168.10.1
---
# For HP servers with different NIC naming
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: Underlay
metadata:
  name: underlay-hp-hardware
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      hardware.vendor: hp
  asn: 64512
  evpn:
    vtepcidr: 100.65.0.0/24
  nics:
    - em1
    - em2
  neighbors:
    - asn: 64500
      address: 192.168.10.1
```

### Controller Implementation

#### Node Matching Logic

The Underlay controller will be enhanced with:

> 1. **Node Label Watching**: Add a watch for Node resource label changes to trigger reconciliation

Reviewer: we can pinpoint the watcher to these specific bits, right ?

Author: > we can pinpoint the watcher to these specific bits, right ?

What do you mean ?

3. **Configuration Application**: Generate and apply FRR configuration only on nodes matched by the Underlay's selector
4. **Dynamic Updates**: Reconcile when:
   - Underlay resources are created/updated/deleted
   - Node labels change
   - Nodes are added/removed from the cluster

#### Conflict Resolution

When multiple Underlays could match the same node, the validation webhook prevents the conflict at admission time. The webhook will:

1. List all existing Underlay resources
2. For each new/updated Underlay, check if any nodes would match multiple Underlays
3. Reject the operation if overlapping selectors are detected

### Status Reporting

Enhance the `UnderlayStatus` to show which nodes are matched:

```go
type UnderlayStatus struct {
    // MatchedNodes lists the nodes currently matched by this Underlay's selector
    // +optional
    MatchedNodes []string `json:"matchedNodes,omitempty"`

    // Conditions represent the latest available observations of the Underlay's state
    // +optional
    Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
```

**Condition Types:**
- `Ready`: All matched nodes have configuration successfully applied

> - `NodesMatched`: At least one node matches the selector

Author: > maybe I'm being a bit short-sighted, but would you explain why we want to differentiate between these two ? 
> 
> i.e. couldn't "no matching nodes found" be one of the "messages" / reasons of  condition `Ready: false` ?

To have the "columnt" view with `-o wide` we usually do 

```
// +kubebuilder:printcolumn:name="Status",type="string",JSONPath=".status.conditions[?(@.status==\\"True\\")].type",description="Status"
```
If we do so we are not propertly has the Status "kubectl -o wide" column since we have

> - `NodesMatched`: At least one node matches the selector

Author: > maybe I'm being a bit short-sighted, but would you explain why we want to differentiate between these two ? 
> 
> i.e. couldn't "no matching nodes found" be one of the "messages" / reasons of  condition `Ready: false` ?

To have the "columnt" view with `-o wide` we usually do:
```
// +kubebuilder:printcolumn:name="Status",type="string",JSONPath=".status.conditions[?(@.status==\\"True\\")].type",description="Status"
```
This will print something like
```
Status
Ready
```
If we just convert this to a reason we are not going to be able to distinguis between not ready or in progress, we should add a columnt to have something like 
```
Status Nodes
```

#### Example Resources

**Nodes matched:**

```yaml
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: Underlay
metadata:
  name: underlay-rack-1
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      topology.kubernetes.io/rack: rack-1
  asn: 64512
  # ... rest of spec
status:
  matchedNodes:
    - worker-1
    - worker-2
    - worker-3
  conditions:
    - type: NodesMatched
      status: "True"
      reason: NodesFound
      message: "3 nodes match the selector"
      lastTransitionTime: "2025-01-15T10:30:00Z"
    - type: Ready
      status: "True"
      reason: ConfigurationSuccessful

>       message: "Configuration applied to all 3 matched nodes"

Reviewer: I don't follow. Could you explain how that would look like ? Maybe consider adding that permutation to the enhancement.

      lastTransitionTime: "2025-01-15T10:30:00Z"
```

**Nodes not matched:**

```yaml
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: Underlay
metadata:
  name: underlay-rack-1
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      topology.kubernetes.io/rack: rack-1
  asn: 64512
  # ... rest of spec
status:
  matchedNodes:
    - worker-1
    - worker-2

>     - worker-3

Author: I have refactor the not matching condition mechanism with the status enhancement bits, so this field no longer applies.

### Phase 2: Controller Enhancement

**Deliverables:**
- Add Node watch to Underlay controller, caching only the node where the
  daemonset pod is running.
- Implement node matching logic using `metav1.LabelSelector`
- Update FRR configuration generation to be node-aware
- Implement status reporting for matched nodes
- Handle dynamic node label changes

**Testing:**
- Controller unit tests for node matching
- Integration tests for configuration application
- Tests for node label change handling
- Tests for node addition/removal

### Phase 3: Status Reporting

**Deliverables:**
- Populate `MatchedNodes` in status
- Add Kubernetes conditions (Ready, NodesMatched, PartiallyConfigured)
- Update status when node set changes

**Testing:**
- Status reporting tests
- Condition transition tests

### Phase 4: Documentation and Examples

**Deliverables:**
- Update API documentation
- Create example configurations for:
  - Multi-rack deployments
  - Multi-datacenter deployments
  - Mixed hardware deployments
- Migration guide from cluster-wide to per-node configuration
- Troubleshooting guide for selector conflicts

### Phase 5: E2E Testing

**Deliverables:**

> - E2E test for multi-rack scenario

Reviewer: what does this look like ? a topology diagram would be incredible, but I just need to understand what does this mean at this point.

Author: I suppose a pair of Underlays for different nodes with different neighbors ASNs,

- E2E test for mixed hardware scenario
- E2E test for dynamic node labeling
- E2E test for validation webhook

> - Performance testing with multiple Underlays and many nodes

Reviewer: really ? Are we actually going through with this ? 

Sounds a bit more than what we usually do.

3. **Configuration Application**: Generate and apply configuration only on nodes matched by the resource's selector
4. **Dynamic Updates**: Reconcile when:
   - Resources are created/updated/deleted
   - Node labels change
   - Nodes are added/removed from the cluster

#### Conflict Resolution

Conflict resolution uses **shared validation logic** between the admission webhook and reconcile loop. Controllers protect themselves without depending on webhooks.

**Underlay-specific restriction:**

Only one Underlay can match a given node. Enforced at two levels using shared validation code:

1. **Admission webhook**: First-line defense that lists all Underlays and rejects operations with overlapping selectors
2. **Reconcile loop**: Re-validates to catch race conditions, updates status conditions, and skips invalid configurations

**L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough:**

Multiple instances can match the same node (for multi-tenancy), but the shared validation logic prevents conflicts such as:
- Two L2VNIs with the same VRF on one node
- VNI number conflicts across resource types

> - Incompatible configurations

Reviewer: I am assuming these will be checked in the controller side. Or do you also plan on checking these in a webhook ? I would favor the former (controller side) for anything that requires checking more than the data in the request for creating/updating the CR.

### Controller Implementation

#### Node Matching Logic

All controllers (Underlay, L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough) will be enhanced with:

1. **Node Label Watching**: Add a watch for Node resource label changes to trigger reconciliation
2. **Selector Matching**: For each node, determine which resource instance applies by matching node labels against all resource `nodeSelector` fields
3. **Configuration Application**: Generate and apply configuration only on nodes matched by the resource's selector
4. **Dynamic Updates**: Reconcile when:
   - Resources are created/updated/deleted
   - Node labels change
   - Nodes are added/removed from the cluster

#### Conflict Resolution

Conflict resolution uses **shared validation logic** between the admission webhook and reconcile loop. Controllers protect themselves without depending on webhooks.

**Underlay-specific restriction:**

Only one Underlay can match a given node. Enforced at two levels using shared validation code:

> 1. **Admission webhook**: First-line defense that will validate the current resource received at the webhook request without looking at other resurces.

Reviewer: seems that we already are looking into other resources: https://github.com/openperouter/openperouter/blob/3ecbac7c2f4eb398b41505e76a58e955c07b7575/internal/webhooks/l2vni_webhook.go#L104

I please put this back the way it was. Sorry for only having noticed it now. 
I'll lgtm it afterwards.

Author: I am going to remove it, we need to not break what we have already, but that's implementation details.

- **Per-rack VNI isolation**: Different racks may need separate VNI configurations for network segmentation
- **Zone-specific VNIs**: Nodes in different availability zones may require different VNI configurations for compliance or performance reasons
- **Selective VNI deployment**: Some workloads on specific nodes may need access to certain VNIs while others don't
- **Gateway placement**: L2 gateway IPs may need to be configured only on specific nodes based on network topology

**L3Passthrough limitations:**
- **Selective passthrough**: Only specific nodes should participate in direct BGP fabric communication
- **Security zones**: Different security zones may require different passthrough configurations
- **Specialized workloads**: Only nodes running certain workloads should have passthrough capabilities

### Goals

- Enable per-node configuration for all OpenPERouter CRDs using Kubernetes node selectors
- Support heterogeneous network configurations across different hardware platforms, racks, and zones
- Allow multiple instances of each CRD to coexist, each targeting specific node subsets
- Maintain backward compatibility with existing cluster-wide configurations

> - Prevent configuration conflicts through validation (no node should be matched by multiple instances of the same CRD type)

Reviewer: wait, I'm confused. For instance, why can't the user have multiple L2 VNIs in the same node ? 

I think this goal is not right - you probably forgot to adjust the text.

Author: Right let me updated this.

### Non-Goals

- Dynamic node selector updates based on workload scheduling (this is handled by node labels)

> - Act external events no related to node labels, like interfaces names and similar ones

Reviewer: IMHO this one does not read well. How about something like 

```suggestion
- Handle external events unrelated to node labels, like interfaces names and similar ones
```

### Controller Implementation

#### Node Matching Logic

All controllers (Underlay, L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough) will be enhanced with:

1. **Node Label Watching**: Add a watch for Node resource label changes to trigger reconciliation
2. **Selector Matching**: For each node, determine which resource instance applies by matching node labels against all resource `nodeSelector` fields
3. **Configuration Application**: Generate and apply configuration only on nodes matched by the resource's selector
4. **Dynamic Updates**: Reconcile when:
   - Resources are created/updated/deleted
   - Node labels change
   - Nodes are added/removed from the cluster

#### Conflict Resolution

**Underlay-specific restriction:**

Only one Underlay can match a given node at any time. This is enforced at two levels:

**Admission webhook (first line of defense):**
1. List all existing Underlay resources
2. For each new/updated Underlay, check if any nodes would match multiple Underlays

> 3. Reject the operation if overlapping selectors are detected

Author: Ahh right, yes we should limit as much as possible

### Backward Compatibility

**Default Behavior**: When `nodeSelector` is `nil` or not specified, the CRDs instances applies to all nodes in the cluster, maintaining backward compatibility with existing configurations.

**Migration Path**:
N/A

### Validation Rules

Validation occurs at two levels to ensure configuration correctness:

#### Admission Webhook Validation

The validation webhook enforces:

1. **No Overlapping Selectors for Underlay**: Multiple Underlays cannot match the same node
2. **Selector Validity**: Node selector must be a valid `metav1.LabelSelector` for all CRD types
3. **Multiple not overlapping per node instances allowed**: L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough can have multiple instances matching the same node, but they cannot conflict within same node

#### Reconcile Loop Validation

**Important**: Validation must also happen in the reconcile loop because webhooks might let configurations slip in during parallel creation of resources. For example:
- Two Underlay resources with overlapping node selectors might be created simultaneously
- Each webhook validation might pass because the other resource doesn't exist yet in the webhook's view

> - Both resources could be admitted, violating the "one Underlay per node" constraint

Author: > this feels redundant; I think we went over this a few sentences above in `Conflict Resolution` for the underlay section. 
> 
> Maybe we can restructure this a bit, removing this redundancy ?

Right, removing.

  - Add validation calls in the reconcile loop for all CRD types
  - For Underlay: validate no overlapping node selectors
  - For L3VNI, L2VNI, L3Passthrough: validate other business rules (VNI conflicts, host session conflicts, etc.)
  - On validation failure: log errors, set status conditions, skip configuration, return without error to avoid infinite retry
  - Ensure validation uses the same logic as the admission webhook
- Update configuration generation to be node-aware for each controller:
  - Underlay: FRR BGP configuration
  - L3VNI: VXLAN and VRF configuration
  - L2VNI: Bridge and VXLAN configuration
  - L3Passthrough: Host session configuration
- Handle dynamic node label changes in all controllers

**Documentation and Examples:**
- Update API documentation for all CRDs
- Create example configurations for:
  - **Underlay**: Multi-rack, multi-datacenter, mixed hardware deployments
  - **L3VNI**: Per-rack VNI, zone-specific VNI configurations
  - **L2VNI**: Selective deployment, per-rack gateway configurations
  - **L3Passthrough**: Edge nodes, per-security-zone configurations
- Migration guide from cluster-wide to per-node configuration

> - Troubleshooting guide for selector conflicts

Reviewer: I think we can offload this discussion to the PR.

Author: I will remove the whole section

```

#### L3Passthrough: Edge Nodes Only

L3Passthrough configured only on edge nodes that participate in direct BGP fabric:

```yaml
# L3Passthrough for edge nodes
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: L3Passthrough
metadata:
  name: edge-passthrough
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      node-role.kubernetes.io/edge: ""
  hostsession:
    asn: 64512
    hostasn: 64700
```

#### L3Passthrough: Per-Security-Zone Configuration

Different security zones have different passthrough configurations:

```yaml
# L3Passthrough for DMZ nodes
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: L3Passthrough
metadata:
  name: dmz-passthrough
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      security-zone: dmz
  hostsession:
    asn: 64512
    hostasn: 64710
---
# L3Passthrough for internal nodes
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: L3Passthrough
metadata:
  name: internal-passthrough
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      security-zone: internal
  hostsession:
    asn: 64512
    hostasn: 64720
```

#### Multiple Instances on Same Node

> Example showing multiple L3VNIs configured on the same set of nodes for different tenants:

Reviewer 2: is this adding value?

kind: L3VNI
metadata:
  name: tenant-c-vni
  namespace: openperouter-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      node-role.kubernetes.io/worker: ""
  vrf: tenant-c
  vni: 5003
  hostsession:
    asn: 64512
    hostasn: 64602
```

In this example, all compute nodes (with `node-role.kubernetes.io/worker` label) will have three L3VNIs configured, one for each tenant. This is allowed and expected behavior for L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough resources.

### Controller Implementation

#### Node Matching Logic

All controllers (Underlay, L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough) will be enhanced with:

1. **Node Label Watching**: Add a watch for Node resource label changes to trigger reconciliation
2. **Selector Matching**: For each node, determine which resource instance applies by matching node labels against all resource `nodeSelector` fields
3. **Configuration Application**: Generate and apply configuration only on nodes matched by the resource's selector
4. **Dynamic Updates**: Reconcile when:
   - Resources are created/updated/deleted
   - Node labels change
   - Nodes are added/removed from the cluster

#### Conflict Resolution

**Underlay-specific restriction:**

> Only one Underlay can match a given node at any time. The validation webhook will prevent conflicts at admission time:

Reviewer 2: the validation must happen also in the reconcile loop (and we have a pattern to do that). This is because webhooks might let configurations slip in in case of parallel creation of resources.

1. List all existing Underlay resources
2. For each new/updated Underlay, check if any nodes would match multiple Underlays
3. Reject the operation if overlapping selectors are detected

**L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough:**

> Multiple instances of L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough can match the same node. This is intentional and allows for:

Reviewer 2: this is true, but is not about conflict resolution. 
We need to ensure we don't have incompatible *vnis and passthrough on the same node (for each node)

Author: But this is already implemented right ? like right now if you for example have two l2vnis with the same vrf they fail, so is all about limiting this for example for l2vnis with the same node selectors.

      status: "False"
      reason: ConfigurationFailed
      message: "1 resource(s) failed to apply"
      lastTransitionTime: "2025-01-15T10:30:00Z"
    - type: Degraded
      status: "True"
      reason: ConfigurationFailed
      message: "Underlay underlay-rack-2 failed: Interface eth2 not present on node"
      lastTransitionTime: "2025-01-15T10:30:00Z"
  failedResources:
    - kind: Underlay
      name: underlay-rack-2
      message: "Interface eth2 not present on node"
```

**Note**: The Underlay, L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough CRDs themselves do not have status fields added by this enhancement. All status reporting is centralized in the per-node RouterNodeConfigurationStatus CRD.

### Backward Compatibility

**Default Behavior**: When `nodeSelector` is `nil` or not specified, the CRDs instances applies to all nodes in the cluster, maintaining backward compatibility with existing configurations.

**Migration Path**:
N/A

### Validation Rules

The validation webhook enforces:

1. **No Overlapping Selectors for Underlay**: Multiple Underlays cannot match the same node
2. **Selector Validity**: Node selector must be a valid `metav1.LabelSelector` for all CRD types

> 3. **Multiple instances allowed**: L3VNI, L2VNI, and L3Passthrough can have multiple instances matching the same node (no overlap validation)

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand but:

- the webhook will have to filter per node so it won't allow overlapping resources to be on the same node
- the reconcile loop will have to check resources that match the current node, and ensure they don't conflict

> ### RBAC Requirements

Reviewer 2: this is not important here I think

```yaml
- apiGroups: [""]
  resources: ["nodes"]
  verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
- apiGroups: ["openpe.openperouter.github.io"]
  resources: ["underlays", "l3vnis", "l2vnis", "l3passthroughs"]
  verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
- apiGroups: ["openpe.openperouter.github.io"]
  resources: ["routernodeconfigurationstatuses"]
  verbs: ["get", "list", "watch", "create", "update", "patch"]
- apiGroups: ["openpe.openperouter.github.io"]
  resources: ["routernodeconfigurationstatuses/status"]
  verbs: ["get", "update", "patch"]
```

### Scalability Considerations

- **Node Watch Overhead**: The controllers watch Node resources for label changes. In clusters with frequent node label updates, this may increase reconciliation frequency. We can improve this by making each daemonset pod reconcile only on the running node using controller-runtime cache filter mechanism.
- **Selector Evaluation**: For each reconciliation, the controller evaluates node selectors against the node where the daemonset is running, so reconciliation is done in parallel between the nodes.
- **Status Updates**: Status updates are per-resource, avoiding conflicts from concurrent updates

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 2: I don't think this section is useful as it's quite a bad alternative :P

Author: Really bad :-), I will remove alternatives, since I forced that in.

    ASN     uint32  `json:"asn,omitempty"`
    Address string  `json:"address"`
    // ... rest of fields
}
```

**Example:**
```yaml
apiVersion: openpe.openperouter.github.io/v1alpha1
kind: Underlay
metadata:
  name: underlay
spec:
  asn: 64512
  nics:
    - toswitch
  neighbors:
    - asn: 64500
      address: 192.168.1.254
      nodeSelector:
        matchLabels:
          topology.kubernetes.io/rack: rack-1
    - asn: 64500
      address: 192.168.2.254
      nodeSelector:
        matchLabels:
          topology.kubernetes.io/rack: rack-2
```

**Rejected because**:
- Cannot handle per-node NIC name differences
- Cannot support per-node ASN requirements
- Less flexible for complex topologies
- More complex to manage when multiple parameters vary per-node
- Doesn't align with Kubernetes patterns (e.g., DaemonSet uses pod-level selectors, not container-level)

## Implementation Plan

**Implementation Disclaimer:**

This implementation is divided into two phases:
- **Phase 1** (Required): Core functionality including API changes, controller implementation, documentation, and E2E testing. This phase delivers a complete, production-ready feature.

> - **Phase 2** (Optional): Enhanced status reporting that depends on the [status-crd enhancement](https://github.com/openperouter/openperouter/blob/main/enhancements/status-crd.md). This phase can be implemented once the status-crd enhancement is complete.

Reviewer 2: see before

- Update CRD generation (`make manifests`)
- Implement validation webhook for Underlay overlapping selector detection (only)
- Add unit tests for validation logic

**Controller Implementation:**
- Add Node watch to all controllers (Underlay, L3VNI, L2VNI, L3Passthrough), caching only the node where the daemonset pod is running
- Implement node matching logic using `metav1.LabelSelector` in each controller
- Update configuration generation to be node-aware for each controller:
  - Underlay: FRR BGP configuration
  - L3VNI: VXLAN and VRF configuration
  - L2VNI: Bridge and VXLAN configuration
  - L3Passthrough: Host session configuration
- Handle dynamic node label changes in all controllers

**Documentation and Examples:**
- Update API documentation for all CRDs
- Create example configurations for:
  - **Underlay**: Multi-rack, multi-datacenter, mixed hardware deployments
  - **L3VNI**: Per-rack VNI, zone-specific VNI configurations
  - **L2VNI**: Selective deployment, per-rack gateway configurations
  - **L3Passthrough**: Edge nodes, per-security-zone configurations
- Migration guide from cluster-wide to per-node configuration
- Troubleshooting guide for selector conflicts

> **Testing:**

Author: I will simplify this massive list
